Metadata for Compiled NecroDecomp_Summer2017 Mapping Filesite: refers to where the experiment was conducted – either Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve in East Bethel MN or Indiana University Research and Teaching Preserve  the Moores Creek Property located in Bloomington, IN.  veg_type: refers to the vegetation community under which the fungal necromass was deployed–either Prairie, Oak Savanna or forest (temperate forest specifically)exp:  refers to the experiment done at each site* CC_prairie 1 is the first experiment Craig See performed with 4 plots in one location (Cedar Creek old field #5). Two fungal isolates were decomposed, with ~weekly collections for one month, then a two month collection for C. geophilum. Mortierella were not collected at later dates because he didn't expect there to be anything left.  * CC_prairie 2 is the second experiment Craig See performed which was meant to replicate the results of CC_prairie but with higher spatial replication (but fewer timepoints) We used 6 plots in 3 fields (one being the same field as study 1). Most bags were collected after 11 days in the field, and a second round of collections occurred at 34 days.* CC_savanna is the experiment Erin Andrews performed in three locations in the same field where distance transects were set-up.  Distance was measured as  meters from forest/grassland intersection, 10 meters into the forest, 5 meters into the grassland and 20 meters into the grassland. * MC_forest is the experiment Katie Beidler performed in 14 forested plots-  7 dominated by AM associated tree species and 7 dominated by EM associated tree species. Two fungal isolates (M. bicolor black and Mortierella)  were decomposed and collected at 2 weeks, 1 month and 3 monthslocation: refers to the specific plot, field or transect locations for the different experimentsunique_plotID: refers to a unique identifier given to each location within each experiment- to be used as a random effect in a mixed effects model.unique_sampID: refers to a unique identifier given to each sample within each experimenttreatment: refers to the mycorrhizal association treatment or whether the necromass was deployed in an AM or EM dominated plant community and what type of plant the treatment is associated with.isolate: refers to the fungal isolate or fungal necromass type that was decomposed. * Ceno: Cenococcum geophilum* Mel-black Meliniomyces bicolor black morph* Mel-white: Meliniomyces bicolor white morph * Mort: Mortierella elongatamel_status: refers to whether or not the fungal isolate or fungal necromass type is melanized or notharvest_date: refers to the date when the litterbag containing fungal necromass was collected (I still need to get these for the CC_savanna experiment)incub_period.days: the time period during which the necromass was decaying in the field in daysincub_period.wks: the time period during which the necromass was decaying in the field in weeksincub_period.years: the time period during which the necromass was decaying in the field in years